have you ever been watching a movie that
includes some science or maths and this
happens
that's not that hard well that's wrong
that's definitely not how that works
that's not that difficult oh my god just
show me the equation so i can show off
today we're looking at some of the most
interesting maths in popular movies
their inaccuracies
and the proofs behind them let's start
with one of the most famous mathematical
movies and one of my personal favorites
the 1997 film good will hunting goodwill
hunting follows the story of will
hunting
a janitor at harvard university who
impresses some professors
by solving some previously unsolved
problems on the public blackboards
here is a recreation of that scene
sorry hey what are you doing
that's people's work you can't graffiti
here sorry
don't you walk away from me hey you
oh you're a clever one what's your name
so of course the question on everyone's
minds is what was the problem on the
board
no just me well anyway the problem
concerns homeomorphically irreducible
trees
of size n equals 10. sound complicated
it's actually something you could
probably do at home by irreducible
we mean that the tree can't have a cycle
or essentially have a point b
irrelevant because it's just part of a
line by homeomorphic
we mean that two trees are
homeomorphically identical
if they could be made to look the same
by simply moving around some of the arms
by n equals 10 we mean that we must have
10 points connected by lines
here are two of them can you find them
all
this next movie is less accurate if you
were a person alive in 2014
then you probably saw the movie or read
the book the fault in our stars
which follows hazel grace lancaster and
augustus waters who meet in a team
cancer support group
the particular quote i take issue with
is this
there's an infinite set of numbers
between 0 and 1.
there's 0.1 0.12
0.112 and an infinite connection of
others
of course there's a bigger infinity of
numbers between
0 and 2. as my tutor once wrote on one
of my problem sheets
wrong consider the set of all numbers
between 0 and 2
and the set of all numbers between 0 and
1 which in mathematics
we write like this now consider a
mapping between these two sets
as in if we take a number between 0 and
and divide it by 2 we have a number
between 0 and 1.
every number between 0 and 2 divided by
2 is between 0 and 1
and every number between 0 and 1
multiplied by 2 is between 0 and 2.
essentially each number in one set has a
unique pair in the other set
so the sets are the same size there are
different sizes of infinity
but not the example that hazel uses if
she'd have said say
the integers versus the real numbers
which are
countable and uncountable respectively
then i would have been much happier
contestants find the limit of this
equation
calling someone else fat won't make you
any skinnier
calling someone stupid doesn't make you
any smarter and ruining regina george's
life definitely didn't make me any
happier
all you can do in life is try and solve
the problem in front of you the limit is
negative one
oh crap i lost that answer is incorrect
now we are in a sudden death if miss
heron can answer this problem correctly
we have a winner limits why couldn't i
remember anything about limits
limits that was the week erin gardner's
haircut oh god he looks so cute
okay focus katie what was on the board
behind aaron's head
if the limit never approaches anything
the limit does not exist
the limit does not exist our new state
champions
the north shore athletes
this is of course a scene from the 2004
cult classic movie mean girls
which follows the story of katie herron
after she moves to a new school from
africa
a bunch of stuff happens and then she
leads the school to matt's competition
victory
i am of course wearing pink as it is a
wednesday lest
regina george smite me down the problem
on the board during the scene looks like
this
we're looking for the limit as x
approaches 0 of
lin 1 minus x minus sine x
all over 1 minus cos squared x 1 minus
cos squared x is equal to sine squared x
and then we can separate the two into
two different fractions
as x approaches 0 1 over sine x
approaches infinity so the limit does
not exist
the 2015 film the man who knew infinity
follows the life of savasana ramanujan
the mathematician who famously derived
groundbreaking new theorems
despite having very limited access to
mathematical teaching
in particular it follows his partnership
with g h hardy
at the university of cambridge between
1914 and 1919.
the main proof in the film is the hardy
ramanujan asymptotic partition formula
which is able to indicate roughly what
the partition number is of any given
integer
p of four is equal to five
now what this means is there are five
ways of adding up the number four you
have one plus one plus one plus one
three plus one two plus one plus one
two 2 2 and 4.
sounds simple enough but when you raise
it to the p of 100
there are 204 226 combinations
the formula that is described takes the
following form
and was revolutionary because so many
mathematicians at the time
believed that there was no such formula
and the partitions would always have to
be done by hand
and now for the moment you've all been
waiting for get me the eigenvector
got a lot of inspiration so we'll just
do one last sim before we pack it in for
the night
get me a mobius strip inverted
give me the eigenvalue of that particle
factoring in spectral decomp
it doesn't matter if it doesn't pan out
if you were like me and sitting in the
cinema with a bunch of other math
students when watching the 2019 film
avengers endgame
then you could have practically heard
the eye roll when this scene came up
finding the eigenvector of an inverted
mobius strip that's ridiculous
and if you're a pure mathematician it is
but tony stark isn't a pure
mathematician he's an engineer
and he's not doing pure maths he's doing
quantum physics
what he's doing here is working out the
energy decomposition of a quantum
particle when restricted to a mobius
strip
it's actually nothing to do with the
things you're probably thinking of like
matrices and characteristic polynomials
that was what we were all thinking of
right what he's calculating is the path
that the particle will take over time
and an eigenvector will allow him to
calculate the values of certain
properties
at different points it's probably not an
accurate way of solving time travel but
no one knows how to do that sorry pure
mathematicians but this time
i think we weren't quite right movie
producers tend to avoid what they
or the general public might not
understand but sometimes they add in
science and maths
to sound clever or for a plot point and
sometimes they get it right and
sometimes they get it wrong
i may personally enjoy the sense of
superiority i get from being able to
explain or debunk some movie maths
but for the sake of keeping your friends
you might want to just shut up and watch
the movie
you